Release blog post for FlowFuse 2.30 (#4951)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2026/05/flowfuse-release-2-30.md

- [ ] Video to follow in a separate PR after publish (2.29 precedent: website#4855, 2.28: website#4724)
- [ ] Marketing copy review (Yndira-E, allthedoll)
- [ ] Engineering review (knolleary, hardillb)
- [ ] SEO description final pass
-->

FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications for you from a description. Tell Expert what you need, and it assembles it on your canvas.

<!--more-->

## FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial Application {#expert-application-building}

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant across FlowFuse's website, platform, and in the immersive Node-RED editor.*

Until now, Expert could surface information, suggest changes, and act on links you clicked. Translating those suggestions into a working OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or Modbus-to-UNS bridge still meant placing every node and wire by hand.

Now you can describe what you want to build and the FlowFuse Expert builds it for you directly on the canvas saving you time. Real-time tool-call status keeps you in the loop while it works, and you keep iterating in chat to refine what it produced so it maps correctly to your real life scenario.

Examples to try:

> - "An OEE dashboard for line 3 with downtime reasons and a daily target"

Author: Extra item: `Get temperature from Modbus address 1001 and publish that to my UNS broker on factory/line3/temperature`

      - flowfuse#7184 EMQX bridge automation: still open, internal-only, dropped from this release
- [ ] Engineering to author two changelog entries (out of scope for this PR):
      - src/changelog/2026/05/expert-application-building.md (lead story)
      - src/changelog/2026/05/snapshot-comparison-polish.md (snapshot follow-up)
      Once both files exist, uncomment the `changelog:` blocks on `ff-expert-application-building` and `snapshot-compare` in src/_data/featureCatalog.yaml. The release blog post then auto-injects the changelog links via the `releaseFeatures` transform; no inline divs needed.
- [ ] Decide whether to flip ff-expert-application-building to showOnPricing: true once the team is ready to surface it on /pricing/
- [ ] Confirm latest Node-RED 5.0 beta version and the most useful forum thread to link
- [ ] Hero image at src/blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-release-2-30.png
- [ ] Video to follow in a separate PR after publish (2.29 precedent: website#4855, 2.28: website#4724)
- [ ] Marketing copy review (Yndira-E, allthedoll)
- [ ] Engineering review (knolleary, hardillb)
- [ ] SEO description final pass

> -->

Author: Can be removed at the end

Author: Moving this to pr body

FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications for you from a description. Tell Expert what you need, and it assembles it on your canvas.

> <!--more-->

Author: TODO

## FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial Application {#expert-application-building}

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant across FlowFuse's website, platform, and in the immersive Node-RED editor.*

Until now, Expert could surface information, suggest changes, and act on links you clicked. Translating those suggestions into a working OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or Modbus-to-UNS bridge still meant placing every node and wire by hand.

Now you can describe what you want to build and the FlowFuse Expert builds it for you directly on the canvas saving you time. Real-time tool-call status keeps you in the loop while it works, and you keep iterating in chat to refine what it produced so it maps correctly to your real life scenario.

Examples to try:

- "An OEE dashboard for line 3 with downtime reasons and a daily target"
- "A Modbus connection that publishes tag values to my UNS broker on `factory/line3/+`"
- "A shift handover screen showing outstanding alarms and recent operator notes"

> - "An asset utilization dashboard for the packaging cell, refreshed every minute"

Reviewer: @dimitrieh It would be ideal if we proposed prompts for things we know work reliably. If it fails doing something users come up with, I don’t think it would be as bad as it failing at something we explicitly stated it was capable of doing.

Author: One prompt that works more reliably has been changed. For now there is a call out at https://github.com/FlowFuse/website/pull/4951/changes#r3201756422 that makes the user aware that we're soft-launching for a reason. For now, I'd rather be ambitious and create hype. Users can't try it out immediately anyway and if they can they are aware we are soft-launching for a reason. Until then we will focus on making it so that these prompts work well

Reviewer: @PabloFilomeno83 would like to hear your thoughts on this one

> <!-- TODO: screenshot or short gif of Expert building, e.g., an OEE dashboard, in the canvas -->

Author: TODO

Author: image placed

- You iterate by talking, in addition to being able to control everything by hand through the canvas

## What else is new?

### A smoother iteration experience with Expert

We refined the immersive editor experience so working with FlowFuse Expert feels more natural and with less context switching. Platform controls like snapshots, environment variables, and instance settings now stay accessible alongside the canvas instead of covering your workspace.

### More usable snapshot comparisons

We continued refining the snapshot comparison experience introduced in 2.29 to make reviewing changes faster and less noisy. Position-only changes can be hidden, computed values no longer appear as modified, and the diff viewer now makes it easier to identify the type of node affected at a glance.

### Smaller updates and fixes

- **Markdown code blocks in Expert preserve line breaks again**: a regression from the 2.29 highlighting work is fixed.
- **Device editor auto-recovery**: when opening the editor on a remote instance fails on first load, the page now refreshes after three seconds rather than leaving you on a 502.

> - **SSO security hardening**: Google Social Login tokens can no longer be reused across logins, and a first SSO login on an unverified local account rotates the password to a random string. <!-- TODO: append "Force-all-users SSO" line if flowfuse#7119 lands -->

Reviewer 2: I'm not really enthused about calling this one out.

Author: Fair, dropped that bullet. The force-all-users SSO bullet from #7119 stays as a separate item since that one is a new admin capability rather than a security-fix disclosure.

- **Tooltip cleanup**: native `title` replaces the buggy custom directive. Less flicker, fewer stuck tooltips.
- **Suspended team logging**: when a billing failure or trial expiry leaves an instance running, we now log why so support can act faster.
- **Device palette settings**: saving palette changes on a device no longer accidentally sends sanitised security flags upstream.
- **Git integration feature flag**: `gitIntegration` respects the all-feature override (Azure DevOps users on edge configurations).
- **Expert chat request timeout**: front-end chat requests time out cleanly rather than hanging.

> <!-- CANDIDATE: keep this bullet only if flowfuse#7078 lands -->

Reviewer 2: This has merged.

Author: Replacing this in a min

Author: Confirmed, dropped the candidate guard comment. The audit-log bullet stays as is.

---
title: "FlowFuse 2.30: Expert Builds Your Industrial Application"
subtitle: "Describe the OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or UNS topic mapping you need, and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your canvas. Plus a more immersive editor optimized for iterating with Expert."
description: "FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications from a description: OEE dashboards, MES handover screens, UNS topic mappings, and more."
date: 2026-05-07
authors: ["dimitrie-hoekstra"]
image: /blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-release-2-30.png
tags:
   - flowfuse
   - news
   - releases
release: "2.30"
features:
   - id: ff-expert-application-building
     heading: "FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial Application"
   - heading: "What else is new?"
   - id: immersive-editor-drawer
     heading: "A smoother iteration experience with Expert"
   - id: snapshot-compare
     heading: "More usable snapshot comparisons"
cta:
  type: sign-up
  title: Try the latest FlowFuse improvements in your own environment

>   description: Describe the application you need and let Expert build it on your canvas.

Reviewer: @dimitrieh I think the “contact us” CTA would make more sense here since Expert application building is still request-access only.

Right now the sign-up CTA + copy makes it sound like anyone can immediately try it just by creating an account, while the body of the post explains that teams need to request access first.

Author: Agreed. Switched to `type: contact` and reworded the title and description so it reflects the soft launch and request-access framing rather than implying instant sign-up access.

<!-- TODO: screenshot or short gif of Expert building, e.g., an OEE dashboard, in the canvas -->

### Availability

Agentic Node-RED development is being soft launched to create a window of opportunity to fine tune the experience in order to scale right after. Right now it is available on **FlowFuse Cloud Starter, Team, and Enterprise on request**. Self-hosted enablement follows shortly.

[Contact us](/contact-us/?subject=FlowFuse%20Expert%20Application%20Building) to let us enable Agentic Node-RED development for your FlowFuse Cloud team.

**Coming next:** self-hosted enablement, plus we are exploring "bring your own key" so teams can point Expert at their own AI provider.

### In practice

- You go from a description to a working OEE dashboard, Modbus integration, or handover screen without needing to place each node by hand
- You see Expert's progress in real time as it builds, rather than waiting on a wall of suggestions to apply manually
- You iterate by talking, in addition to being able to control everything by hand through the canvas

## What else is new?

### A smoother iteration experience with Expert

> We optimized the immersive Node-RED editor so iterating with FlowFuse Expert on your industrial application is easier and with less context switching. The FlowFuse Platform UI can stay available and the instance drawer no longer overlaps with the Node-RED canvas, so settings, snapshots, environment variables, palette, and group or application assignment all sit alongside your work rather than covering it.

Reviewer: @dimitrieh Maybe we could keep this a bit more workflow/value-focused and reduce some of the UI implementation details here. I think the main benefit is that iterating with Expert feels more natural and involves less context switching

```suggestion
We refined the immersive editor experience so working with FlowFuse Expert feels more natural and with less context switching. Platform controls like snapshots, environment variables, and instance settings now stay accessible alongside the canvas instead of covering your workspace.
```

Author: Applied your suggestion verbatim. Cutting the implementation-detail list reads cleaner, and the workflow framing fits the section better.

### More usable snapshot comparisons

> We iterated on the property-level diff viewer that shipped in release 2.29 so the right information is more easily made available to you. Computed properties (group node `w` and `h` values) no longer flag as changes, position-only changes are hidden by default, the change panel labels each entry with a node-type badge (config, tab, or normal), and JSON sections support prettify and wrap toggles.

Reviewer: @dimitrieh Similar thought here — I think focusing a bit more on the workflow improvement (“easier to review meaningful changes”, “less noisy diffs”, etc.) would make this easier to scan in a release post than going deep into the implementation-specific details.

```suggestion
We continued refining the snapshot comparison experience introduced in 2.29 to make reviewing changes faster and less noisy. Position-only changes are hidden by default, computed values no longer appear as modified, and the diff viewer now makes it easier to identify the type of node affected at a glance.
```

Author: Applied your suggested rewrite, with one tweak: I changed "Position-only changes are hidden by default" to "Position-only changes can be hidden". Andrea flagged in Slack today that they are not hidden by default in shipped code, and should not be (a snapshot pair where only positions changed would otherwise show no diff at all).

> We iterated on the property-level diff viewer that shipped in release 2.29 so the right information is more easily made available to you. Computed properties (group node `w` and `h` values) no longer flag as changes, position-only changes can be hidden when you want to focus on substantive edits, the change panel labels each entry with a node-type badge (config, tab, or normal), and JSON sections support prettify and wrap toggles.

Reviewer: Similar thought here — I think focusing a bit more on the workflow improvement (“easier to review meaningful changes”, “less noisy diffs”, etc.) would make this easier to scan in a release post than going deep into the implementation-specific details.

```suggestion
We continued refining the snapshot comparison experience introduced in 2.29 to make reviewing changes faster and less noisy. Position-only changes are hidden by default, computed values no longer appear as modified, and the diff viewer now makes it easier to identify the type of node affected at a glance.
```

Author: Same as my note on the other comment regarding this section: applied with one tweak ("can be hidden" instead of "hidden by default") per Andrea’s Slack feedback today.

- **Suspended team logging**: when a billing failure or trial expiry leaves an instance running, we now log why so support can act faster.
- **Device palette settings**: saving palette changes on a device no longer accidentally sends sanitised security flags upstream.
- **Git integration feature flag**: `gitIntegration` respects the all-feature override (Azure DevOps users on edge configurations).
- **Expert chat request timeout**: front-end chat requests time out cleanly rather than hanging.
<!-- CANDIDATE: keep this bullet only if flowfuse#7078 lands -->
- **Audit log stop reasons**: stop events show the underlying reason in the audit log detail rather than a generic message.

## Node-RED

[Node-RED 5.0](https://nodered.org/blog/2025/12/03/node-red-roadmap-to-5) is in active beta. It is a modernization and UI re-architecture that readies Node-RED for better AI-guided development and brings more clarity to manual editing. The latest betas land in the Node-RED forum first, with release notes, known issues, and the team looking for feedback. Try them out and follow along on the [Node-RED forum](https://discourse.nodered.org/).

> We are aiming to ship Node-RED 5.0 as a stack option in FlowFuse by the end of May. Until then, Node-RED 4.1 remains the default.

Reviewer: @dimitrieh I wonder if this section could be reduced to a small “looking ahead” note near the end of the post instead of a full H2 section.

Right now it gives a lot of narrative weight to something that isn’t part of the 2.30 release itself yet, and the links to the beta/forum encourages users to go outside FlowFuse to try it directly.

Maybe something shorter like:

> Looking ahead: we’re actively preparing support for Node-RED 5.0 in FlowFuse and currently expect it to become available as a stack option by the end of May. Until then, Node-RED 4.1 remains the default.

Could help keep the focus on the actual release features and the Expert story.

Author: Good call. Demoted it to a one-line "Looking ahead" note just before the bottom rule, using your suggested copy. Dropped the H2 and the forum link so the focus stays on 2.30.

---
title: "FlowFuse 2.30: Expert Builds Your Industrial Application"

> subtitle: "Describe the OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or UNS topic mapping you need, and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your canvas. Plus a more immersive editor optimized for iterating with Expert."

Author: ```suggestion
subtitle: "Describe the OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or UNS topic mapping you need, and FlowFuse Expert builds it on your workspace. Plus a more immersive editor optimized for iterating with Expert."
```

description: "FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications from a description: OEE dashboards, MES handover screens, UNS topic mappings, and more."
date: 2026-05-07
authors: ["dimitrie-hoekstra"]
image: /blog/2026/05/images/flowfuse-release-2-30.png
tags:
   - flowfuse
   - news
   - releases
release: "2.30"
features:
   - id: ff-expert-application-building
     heading: "FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial Application"
   - heading: "What else is new?"
   - id: immersive-editor-drawer
     heading: "A smoother iteration experience with Expert"
   - id: snapshot-compare
     heading: "More usable snapshot comparisons"
cta:
  type: contact
  title: Get FlowFuse Expert Application Building enabled for your team
  description: Application Building is in soft launch on FlowFuse Cloud Starter, Team, and Enterprise. Request access to enable it for your team.
---

> FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications for you from a description. Tell Expert what you need, and it assembles it on your canvas.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
FlowFuse 2.30 lets FlowFuse Expert build industrial applications for you from a description. Tell Expert what you need, and it assembles it on your workspace.
```

## FlowFuse Expert Builds Your Industrial Application {#expert-application-building}

*FlowFuse Expert is our integrated AI assistant across FlowFuse's website, platform, and in the immersive Node-RED editor.*

Until now, Expert could surface information, suggest changes, and act on links you clicked. Translating those suggestions into a working OEE dashboard, MES handover screen, or Modbus-to-UNS bridge still meant placing every node and wire by hand.

> Now you can describe what you want to build and the FlowFuse Expert builds it for you directly on the canvas saving you time. Real-time tool-call status keeps you in the loop while it works, and you keep iterating in chat to refine what it produced so it maps correctly to your real life scenario.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you can describe what you want to build and the FlowFuse Expert builds it for you directly on the Node-RED workspace saving you time. Real-time tool-call status keeps you in the loop while it works, and you keep iterating in chat to refine what it produced so it maps correctly to your real life scenario.
```

Examples to try:

- "An OEE dashboard for line 3 with downtime reasons and a daily target"

> - "A Modbus connection that publishes tag values to my UNS broker on `factory/line3/+`"

Author: ```suggestion
- "Get temperature from Modbus address 1001 and publish that to my UNS broker on factory/line3/temperature"
```

- "A shift handover screen showing outstanding alarms and recent operator notes"
- "An asset utilization dashboard for the packaging cell, refreshed every minute"

![FlowFuse Expert assembling an application on the Node-RED canvas from a chat prompt](src/blog/2026/05/images/expert-application-building.gif){data-zoomable style="border: 2px solid #E5E7EB;"}

> <figcaption>FlowFuse Expert assembling an application on the Node-RED canvas from a chat prompt.</figcaption>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![FlowFuse Expert assembling an application on the Node-RED workspace from a chat prompt](src/blog/2026/05/images/expert-application-building.gif){data-zoomable style="border: 2px solid #E5E7EB;"}
<figcaption>FlowFuse Expert assembling an application on the Node-RED workspace from a chat prompt.</figcaption>
```

### Availability

> Agentic Node-RED development is being soft launched to create a window of opportunity to fine tune the experience in order to scale right after. Right now it is available on **FlowFuse Cloud Starter, Team, and Enterprise on request**. Self-hosted enablement follows shortly.

Author: Call out on this being soft-launched for a reason.

[Contact us](/contact-us/?subject=FlowFuse%20Expert%20Application%20Building) to let us enable Agentic Node-RED development for your FlowFuse Cloud team.

**Coming next:** self-hosted enablement, plus we are exploring "bring your own key" so teams can point Expert at their own AI provider.

### In practice

- You go from a description to a working OEE dashboard, Modbus integration, or handover screen without needing to place each node by hand
- You see Expert's progress in real time as it builds, rather than waiting on a wall of suggestions to apply manually

> - You iterate by talking, in addition to being able to control everything by hand through the canvas

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- You iterate by talking, in addition to being able to control everything by hand through the workspace 
```

## What else is new?

### A smoother iteration experience with Expert

> We refined the immersive editor experience so working with FlowFuse Expert feels more natural and with less context switching. Platform controls like snapshots, environment variables, and instance settings now stay accessible alongside the canvas instead of covering your workspace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We refined the immersive editor experience so working with FlowFuse Expert feels more natural and with less context switching. Platform controls like snapshots, environment variables, and instance settings now stay accessible alongside the workspace instead of covering your workspace.
```
